---
title: 2.5 Implicit Differentiation
---

- Distinguish between functions written in implicit form and explicit form.
- Use implicit differentiation to find the derivative of a function.
- Find derivatives of functions using logarithmic differentiation.

## Assignment

- **Vocabulary** and **teal boxes**{: .teal-box}
- p180 1–21 odd, 25, 28–31, 42, 43, 47, 49, 50, 53, 55, 59–61, 63, 68 *80, 81, 84–87*{: .ap-problems}

## Additional Resources

- AP Topics: 3.2, 5.12
- Khan Academy
  - [Implicit differentiation](https://www.khanacademy.org/math/ap-calculus-ab/ab-differentiation-2-new/ab-3-2/v/implicit-differentiation-1)
  - [Exploring behaviors of implicit relations](https://www.khanacademy.org/math/ap-calculus-ab/ab-diff-analytical-applications-new/ab-5-12/v/implicit-curve-horizontal-tangent)

---

Up until this point, we've differentiated explicit functions, which is when a function $y$ is written as a function of $x$. Like, $y=1/x$. An implicit function is when this isn't the case. If we rearranged that equation, we can get the implicit function $xy=1$.

So, we'll be looking at how to differentiate functions that can't be defined explicitly. Equations like $y^2=x$.

Before that, let's revisit chain rule and the power rule. And let's be really picky and define our inner function as $u=x$.

$$\begin{align*}
\frac{d}{dx}[x^2] &= 2x\frac{d}{dx}[x] \\[1em]
                  &= 2x\frac{dx}{dx} \\[1em]
                  &= 2x
\end{align*}$$

Since we are always differentiating with respect to $x$, those steps are unnecessary. There's no need to explore how $x$ changes with respect to $x$.

We'll take this same idea over to implicit functions. The variable itself will be a function that needs to be differentiated with respect to $x$.

Let's differentiate $y^2=x$.

$$\begin{align*}
\frac{d}{dx}[y^2]&=\frac{d}{dx}[x] \\[1em]
2y\frac{d}{dx}[y] &= 1 \\[1em]
2y\frac{dy}{dx} &= 1 \\[1em]
\frac{dy}{dx} &= \frac{1}{2y}
\end{align*}$$

Note that last step has us explicitly define the derivative by isolating $\frac{dy}{dx}$.

There's a general strategy on page 175 in the book that I'll include here.

> #### Guidelines for Implicit Differentiation
>
> 1. Differentiate both sides with respect to $x$.
> 2. Collect all terms involving $\frac{dy}{dx}$ on one side, with the rest going on the other.
> 3. Factor out $\frac{dy}{dx}$.
> 4. Solve for $\frac{dy}{dx}$.

When finding higher order derivatives, you can substitute in early ones when needed. Let's find the second derivative of $x^2+y^2 = 25$.

$$\begin{align*}
\frac{d}{dx}[x^2 + y^2] &= \frac{d}{dx}[25] \\[1em]
2x +2y\frac{dy}{dx} &= 0 \\[1em]
2y\frac{dy}{dx} &= -2x \\[1em]
\frac{dy}{dx} &= \frac{-2x}{2y} \\[1em]
\frac{dy}{dx} &= -\frac{x}{y} \\[1em]
\end{align*}$$

Now for number 2.

$$\begin{align*}
\frac{d^2y}{dx^2}&=-\frac{1\cdot y-x\frac{dy}{dx}}{y^2} \\[1em]
&= -\frac{y-x\left(-\frac{x}{y}\right)}{y^2} \\[1em]
&= -\frac{y+\frac{x^2}{y}}{y^2} \\[1em]
&= -\frac{\frac{y^2}{y}+\frac{x^2}{y}}{y^2}\\[1em]
&= -\frac{y^2+x^2}{y^3}
\end{align*}$$

Quick note: you will not be able to graph derivatives of implicit functions in most cases.

## Logarithmic Differentiation

This is a strategy for differentiating functions that would otherwise involve a heavy use of product or quotient rule, or when you have a variable in both the base and exponent, like $x^x$. It makes use of these log rules.

$$ \ln\left(ab\right) = \ln a + \ln b \qquad \ln\left(\frac{a}{b}\right) = \ln a - \ln b \qquad \ln a^b = b\ln a$$

We'll cover some examples in class, but generally speaking, take the natural log of both sides, use the appropriate log rule to rewrite, then differentiate as usual.

Using this is a personal preference and it is not directly tested on the AP exam.
