---
title: Interquartile range
---

[Slideshow version](https://1drv.ms/p/c/c4097c61e06a2b97/EVlpcKHPntZIkfTwIMkDOQsBGOOI2LHpbwv1MVYBvRGRcA?e=LY1iCR)

Medians are nice, but sometimes we need more than just a middle marker. We'll add to our repertoire **quartiles**, which sound like quarters, because that's what they do: they break the data in quarters.

There are three of them (fencepost problem!). The first quartile $Q_1$ marks the end of the first 25% of data. $Q_2$ marks where 50% of the data falls, but this is the same thing as the median. $Q_3$ marks where 75% of the data falls.

## Finding quartiles

Finding quartiles begins by finding the median $Q_2$. Put your data in order, then find the middle.

$$ \begin{array}{ccccccc}
2 & 4 & 4 & 5   & 6 & 7 & 8 \\
  &   &   & Q_2 &   &   &
\end{array}$$

Now you have split data. With each half, repeat the what you did before. Make sure you don't include the median when finding your other quartiles.

$$ \begin{array}{ccccccc}
2 & 4    & 4 & 5   & 6 & 7 & 8 \\
  & Q_1  &   & Q_2 &   & Q_3  &
\end{array}$$

With an even number of entries, the process is the same. We still don't include the median, but that's not a problem since the median won't technically be an entry.

$$ \begin{array}{ccccc|ccccc}
1 & 3 & 3 & 4 & 5 & 6 & 6 & 7 & 8 & 8 \\
\end{array}$$

Our median is 5.5, and again we look at our two halves and find the middle.

$$ \begin{array}{ccccc|ccccc}
1 & 3 & 3   & 4 & 5 & 6 & 6 & 7 & 8 & 8 \\
  &   & Q_1 &   &   &   &   & Q_3  &   &
\end{array}$$

## Interquartile range

If you recall, range was the difference between the maximum and minimum data values. Interquartile range is the difference between $Q_1$ and $Q_3$, or the spread of the middle 50% of your data.

In our first examples, our interquartile range was $7-4 = 3$. In the second, it was $7-3 = 4$.
